219 bundle documentation (#298)
ynput/ayon-documentation: website/docs/admin_server_bundles_and_addons.md

- **Project Settings `P+P`**: These settings are at the project level. They inherit studio settings and allow overriding them for the specific project.
- **Studio Site Settings**: These are addon settings per `Site ID` at the studio level.
- **Project Site Settings**: These are addon settings per `Site ID` at the project level.

:::info `Site ID` and Site Settings
`Site ID` refers to each machine with the AYON launcher installed.
Each machine receives a unique `Site ID` when launching the app for the first time and connecting to the AYON server.

- Both **Studio** and **Project** site settings are entirely separate and distinct.
  - They do not inherit or override any other settings.
  - They only appear for addons in the production bundle.
:::

### Settings Values and Overrides

![Settings and Overrides Color Code](assets/server/admin/server_and_addons/settings_and_overrides_colorcode.png)

Settings and their overrides use the following color code:

- **No Color**: Default value
- <span style={{color:'#25d15f'}}>▌</span>: Studio override
- <span style={{color:'#ff9e3d'}}>▌</span>: Project override

### Settings Filter

> 

Author: After an internal discussion on discord, let's mention when the feature was introduced. 
> "Introduced in 1.5.4" as a footnote.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/3bf76706cc2c1a5bb594d9dace3a74d785d84fc1

### Bundles Tab

The Bundles Tab in the AYON server is used to manage your bundles.

![Bundles Tab](assets/server/admin/server_and_addons/bundles_tab.png)

1. **Bundles List**: Displays available bundles on your server.
2. **Name and Launcher**: Shows the bundle's name and the assigned version of the AYON launcher.
3. **Addon List**: Lists addons included in your bundle.
4. **Dependency Packages**: Python modules needed for your bundle. Learn more at [What are dependency packages and how to update them? | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/what-are-dependency-package-and-how-to-update-them/1991).
5. **Actions**:
   - **+ Add Bundle**: Create a new bundle from scratch.
   - **Upload Addons**: Upload addon `.zip` packages to your server.
   - **Upload Launcher**: Upload an AYON Launcher.
   - **Upload Dependency Package**: Upload a dependency package.
   - **Show Archived**: Enable to display archived bundles.
   - **Set Staging**: Assign a `Staging` status to your bundle.
   - **Set Production**: Assign a `Production` status to your bundle.
   - **Duplicate and Edit**: Create a new bundle from the selected bundle.

> :::info Upload AYON Products

Reviewer: I think "Products" is the wrong terminology here. It should be `Addons`, right?

Products conflicts to much with the actual published products too.

EDIT: I suppose you're referring to "Products" due to it being either the addons, launcher or dependency packages and not just addons. It just seems quite confusing compared to the production terminology.

Author: you are right, what could be a suitable term to refer to AYON artifacts either the addons, launcher or dependency packages and not just addons.

Reviewer: Tagging @mkolar @Innders - they may have an idea on terminology here.

Reviewer 2: Upload Addons, Launchers and Dependency Packages.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/7f24457383569e711b4cb6cacd6f622509cb02e8

> Most of the time, you can make various AYON products available on your server using the [Addon Market](admin_server_market.md) and by [installing pipeline releases](admin_server_updating_pipeline.md).

Reviewer: Would this be better?
```suggestion
You can easily install new or update existing AYON addons on your server using the [Addon Market](admin_server_market.md) and by [installing pipeline releases](admin_server_updating_pipeline.md).
```

Author: same comment as https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298#discussion_r1909458904
as I'd like refer to the different types to AYON artifacts.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/7f24457383569e711b4cb6cacd6f622509cb02e8

> However, when customizing your pipeline, you'll often need to upload different AYON products manually. Use the **Upload Addons**, **Upload Launcher**, and **Upload Dependency Package** buttons for this process.

Reviewer: Should there be a hint somewhere that Ynput cloud hosted installs that are not on an active paid subscription may have locked uploading of custom addon `.zip` to avoid potential abuse of the Ynput cloud servers ? @mkolar

Author: That's fair! 
I'm not sure what are the limitations. does it limit the uploading custom bundles only?

Reviewer: As far as I know custom addon - and you can get addons only through marketplace - but it may only be the trial account. Not sure.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/d46882657b013e0b1752ce12121ed627d4268fdd

:::

### Create a Bundle

There are two ways to start creating a bundle:

- **Duplicate and Edit**: Duplicate the selected bundle and begin editing its contents.
- **+ Add Bundle**: Start creating a new bundle from scratch.

![](assets/server/admin/server_and_addons/create_bundle.png)

When creating a bundle, several options are available:

1. **Bundle Name**: The name of the bundle.
2. **Launcher Version**: The assigned version of the AYON launcher.
3. **Dev Bundle**: Enable this to set the bundle to `Dev`. *This setting is available when [Developer Mode](dev_dev_mode.md) is enabled.*
4. **Assigned Dev**: The developer assigned to the dev bundle. *This setting is available when [Developer Mode](dev_dev_mode.md) is enabled.*
5. **Addons List**: A list of addons included in your bundle, where you can specify the version of each addon.
6. **Compatibility Checker**: Ensures your selected addons meet compatibility requirements with other AYON products in the bundle. Learn more in [Understanding Dependencies in AYON Addons | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/understanding-dependencies-in-ayon-addons/1992).

:::info

> After creation, the previously mentioned options will be locked. You can only change:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a bundle is created, most of the options will be locked. You can only change:
```

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/c4e6ebf1b1da8bd66b1e42d5ffaec4207c3a35a7

| Bundles Tab | Settings Tab |
|--|--|
| ![](assets/server/admin/server_and_addons/bundles_list_1.png) | ![](assets/server/admin/server_and_addons/bundles_list_2.png) |

**Quick Notes:**
- **Production** and **Staging** statuses can only be assigned to one bundle each.
- You can set **Production** and **Staging** to the same bundle to experiment with different settings, or to two different bundles to test different addon versions.
- A bundle marked as **Dev** cannot be changed to **Production** or **Staging**. You must `unset Dev` before changing its status.
- Dev bundles are exclusive to one developer, so each developer should have their own dev bundle.
- The AYON launcher supports selecting the pipeline mode—**Production**, **Staging**, or **Dev**—which automatically picks the bundle associated with the selected mode.

:::tip Override Pipeline Mode
The AYON launcher lets you override the default behavior, allowing you to specify a bundle and pipeline mode. For more details, visit [How to use different bundles with different projects? | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/how-to-use-different-bundles-with-different-projects/1096).
:::

> ### How settings are organized?

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/c4e6ebf1b1da8bd66b1e42d5ffaec4207c3a35a7

Each addon version includes different settings variations:

> - **Default Values**: These values are built into the addon version.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/c4e6ebf1b1da8bd66b1e42d5ffaec4207c3a35a7

---
id: admin_server_bundles_and_addons
title: Bundles & Addons
sidebar_label: Bundles & Addons
description: Bundles & Addons Documentation.
toc_max_heading_level: 5
---

import clsx from "clsx";
import styles from "@site/src/pages/features/styles.module.scss";
import addons from "@site/src/data/addons/index.ts";
import AddonCard from "@site/src/pages/features/_components/AddonCard";

## Addons
### What is an Addon?

An addon is a set of code and settings used to extend the AYON server and pipeline. 
You can find a comprehensive list of available addons [here](/features).

<ul
    className={clsx(
        "container",
        "clean-list",
        styles.showcaseList
    )}
>
    {addons.slice(0, 6).map((addon, i) => (
        <AddonCard key={addon.title} addon={addon} />
    ))}
</ul>

### Addons Tab

> The Addons Tab in the AYON server is used to manage your addon packages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The "Addons" tab in the AYON server is used to manage your addon packages. Navigate to the "Studio Settings" (S+S hotkey combo) and switch to "Addons" pane at the very top left to display all installed addons their status and available versions.
```

- <span style={{color:'#ff858b'}}>⬤</span> : Addon is included in a <span style={{color:'#1c2026', backgroundColor:'#ff858b', borderRadius: '4px', padding: '2px 4px'}}>Staging</span> bundle.
- <span style={{color:'#c78fff'}}>⬤</span> : Addon is included in a <span style={{color:'#1c2026',backgroundColor:'#c78fff', borderRadius: '4px', padding: '2px 4px'}}>Development</span> bundle.
- <span style={{color:'#e2e2e3'}}>⬤</span> : Addon is included in an <span style={{color:'#1c2026',backgroundColor:'#e2e2e3', borderRadius: '4px', padding: '2px 4px'}}>Unarchived</span> bundle.
:::

:::tip
Developers can upload or remove addons using the AYON Python API.  
For example, see [AYON Python API First Steps: Upload Addon | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/ayon-python-api-first-steps/1278#upload-addon-7).
:::

### Install Addons

You can install addons to your AYON server in a few ways:
1. **Using Addon Market:** Search for addon releases and choose which one to install. Check out the [Addon Market](admin_server_market.md#market-addons) for more details.

> 2. **Upload Addon `.zip` Packages:** Use the **Upload Addons** option on the [Addons](#addons-tab) or [Bundles](#bundles-tab) tab. This is usually for creating `.zip` packages for addons that aren't released yet, GitHub pull requests, or packages shared within the community. For more information, see [How to Test Addons in Active Development on GitHub | Yn Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/how-to-test-addons-in-active-development-on-github/2203).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Upload Addon `.zip` Packages:** Use the **Upload Addons** option on the [Addons](#addons-tab) or [Bundles](#bundles-tab) tab. This is usually for creating `.zip` packages for addons that aren't released yet, GitHub pull requests, or packages shared within the community. For more information, see [How to Test Addons in Active Development on GitHub | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/how-to-test-addons-in-active-development-on-github/2203).
```
What's the reason for abbreviating Ynput to Yn?

Author: I thought it's a valid shortcut since we are saying `Yn Summit` instead of `Ynput Summit`.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/5a10b44dca21adbd20ca6a2312ae80b66927b5b1

:::info Add Installed Addons to Your Pipeline

> To add addons to your pipeline, [create a bundle](#create-a-bundle) and include or update the desired addons in it. Assign a pipeline mode to the bundle. More details about bundles and how to create them are in the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add addons to your pipeline, [create a bundle](#create-a-bundle) and include or update the desired addons in it. Assign a [pipeline mode](#pipeline-modes) to the bundle. More details about bundles and how to create them are in the next section.
```

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/5a10b44dca21adbd20ca6a2312ae80b66927b5b1

   - **Upload Launcher**: Upload an AYON Launcher.
   - **Upload Dependency Package**: Upload a dependency package.
   - **Show Archived**: Enable to display archived bundles.
   - **Set Staging**: Assign a `Staging` status to your bundle.
   - **Set Production**: Assign a `Production` status to your bundle.
   - **Duplicate and Edit**: Create a new bundle from the selected bundle.

:::info Upload Addons, Launchers, and Dependency Packages

You can easily install or update existing AYON addons, launchers, and dependency packages on your server using the [installing pipeline releases](admin_server_updating_pipeline.md) or by getting new addons from the [Addon Market](admin_server_market.md).

However, when customizing your pipeline, you might need to manually upload different AYON addons, launchers, and dependency packages. Use the **Upload Addons**, **Upload Launcher**, and **Upload Dependency Package** buttons for this process.

For more details on customizing your pipeline, please refer to:
- [Dev Docs](dev_introduction.md)
- [`addon-dev` tag | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/tag/addon-dev)

:::

:::caution Addons Upload Restriction

> [Ynput Cloud](https://ynput.cloud/) instances restrict custom addon uploads by default.

Reviewer: Is this true for cloud instances, or only for trial instances? @mkolar

Author: I think any Ayon subscription even if it were on premise.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/16c62d92c0746a52baddc2f6a9b5e8eba94ec92c

4. **Assigned Dev**: The developer assigned to the dev bundle. *This setting is available when [Developer Mode](dev_dev_mode.md) is enabled.*
5. **Addons List**: A list of addons included in your bundle, where you can specify the version of each addon.
6. **Compatibility Checker**: Ensures your selected addons meet compatibility requirements with other AYON products in the bundle. Learn more in [Understanding Dependencies in AYON Addons | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/understanding-dependencies-in-ayon-addons/1992).

:::info
After a bundle is created, most of the options will be locked. You can only change:

- Dependency Packages
- Version of some server addons that don't affect the pipeline, e.g., [Jira Addon](/features?addons=jira).
:::

### Dependency Packages

Dependency packages are essential in bundles as they include the necessary Python dependencies for the addons' client code to function properly.

Once a bundle is created, you can set or update the dependency package for each operating system. Clicking the `+` button shows a dropdown menu where you can select a dependency package.

:::tip Get Dependency Packages

> When [updating the pipeline to the latest release](admin_server_updating_pipeline.md), you receive a bundle and a compatible dependency package. In some cases, when building a custom bundle, you may need to build a dependency package for it. For this, use the [ayon-dependencies-tool](https://github.com/ynput/ayon-dependencies-tool). For more information, check out this community [guide: What are dependency packages and how to update them? | Yn Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/what-are-dependency-package-and-how-to-update-them/1991).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When [updating the pipeline to the latest release](admin_server_updating_pipeline.md), you receive a bundle and a compatible dependency package. In some cases, when building a custom bundle, you may need to build a dependency package for it. For this, use the [ayon-dependencies-tool](https://github.com/ynput/ayon-dependencies-tool). For more information, check out this community [guide: What are dependency packages and how to update them? | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/what-are-dependency-package-and-how-to-update-them/1991).
```

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/5a10b44dca21adbd20ca6a2312ae80b66927b5b1

:::tip Override Pipeline Mode
The AYON launcher lets you override the default behavior, allowing you to specify a bundle and pipeline mode. For more details, visit [How to use different bundles with different projects? | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/how-to-use-different-bundles-with-different-projects/1096).
:::

### How are settings organized?

Each addon version includes different settings variations:

- **Factory defaults**: These values are built into the addon version.
- **Production**: This variation is accessed when the addon is added to a bundle marked as production.
- **Staging**: This variation is accessed when the addon is added to a bundle marked as staging.
- **Development variations**: They are added on demand when the addon is included in a dev bundle. The variation name matches the name of the dev bundle that includes the addon.
  
:::info
The following example assumes a dev bundle named `Develop`.
:::

![](assets/server/admin/server_and_addons/addon_settings.png)<br/>
*Example addon with three variations: Production, Staging, and Develop.*

> **It's important to remember that bundles only group the addons for use in the AYON pipeline, and any settings values are saved within the addons themselves. This explains why the same addon retains its production and staging values when added to other bundles marked as production or staging.**

Author: I've to admit it's hard to explain this topic without going further into dev details since this is an admin doc not dev doc.

> **It's important to remember that bundles only group the addons for use in the AYON pipeline, and any settings values are saved within the addons themselves. This explains why the same addon retains its production and staging values when added to other bundles marked as production or staging.**

Author: @martastain what do you think

> **It's important to remember that bundles only group the addons for use in the AYON pipeline, and any settings values are saved within the addons themselves. This explains why the same addon retains its production and staging values when added to other bundles marked as production or staging.**

Reviewer 4: I agree with @BigRoy here. Maybe something like this?
```
Addon settings are stored for each addon version and variant (not per bundle), that's why the same addon retains its production and staging values when added to other bundles marked as production or staging
```

:::

### Install Addons

You can install addons to your AYON server in a few ways:
1. **Using Addon Market:** Search for addon releases and choose which one to install. Check out the [Addon Market](admin_server_market.md#market-addons) for more details.
2. **Upload Addon `.zip` Packages:** Use the **Upload Addons** option on the [Addons](#addons-tab) or [Bundles](#bundles-tab) tab. This is usually for creating `.zip` packages for addons that aren't released yet, GitHub pull requests, or packages shared within the community. For more information, see [How to Test Addons in Active Development on GitHub | Ynput Forums](https://community.ynput.io/t/how-to-test-addons-in-active-development-on-github/2203).

:::info Add Installed Addons to Your Pipeline

To add addons to your pipeline, [create a bundle](#create-a-bundle) and include or update the desired addons in it. Assign a [pipeline mode](#pipeline-modes) to the bundle. More details about bundles and how to create them are in the next section.
:::

## Bundles

### What is a Bundle?

> A bundle is a collection of AYON products used in the AYON pipeline. It includes:

Reviewer 5: "Product" means something else in AYON :grimacing:

Author: Great point!

Author: what about: 
```suggestion
A bundle is a collection of AYON Pipeline components used in the AYON pipeline. It includes:
```

Reviewer 2: I would suggest that: A bundle is a collection of AYON integrations (Addons) used in your pipeline.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/d9345ed55305dfa13f9e7c3b859985244fc408ef

---
id: admin_server_bundles_and_addons
title: Bundles & Addons
sidebar_label: Bundles & Addons
description: Bundles & Addons Documentation.
toc_max_heading_level: 5
---
 
## About Bundles & Addons
### Bundles vs Addon
A bundle is a set of addons.
addon is a set of code and settings used to extend AYON server and pipeline.

Bundles can be marked as `production`, `staging`, `<dev-bundle-name>` variant.

:::note Launch with different variants
You can use different variants with the launcher.
you can specify with variant to use by using the following flags with ayon launcher 
- `--use-staging`
- `--use-dev`

You can  overriding the default behavior and specifying the bundle on launch.
more info check [How to use different bundles with different projects?](https://community.ynput.io/t/how-to-use-different-bundles-with-different-projects/1096)
:::
        
:::note
Dev variant is the same as dev bundle name `<dev-bundle-name>`
Dev bundle are only accessible for the **assigned admin user**.
:::

### How Settings work

This variant is used across the addons.  
Each addon is saved on the server with different variant of settings.
The variant used in addons is exposed on the bundle.

> The variant value on the bundle is like a main switch that set all the addons to use that variant value.

Reviewer: I couldn't make any sense of this myself. 🗡️ 

Which variant? How is it used? Etc. It tells me too little about settings and more about variants and bundles.

Maybe the "title" of the section is what confuses me "How settings work" - but it doesn't seem to be about that at all?

I feel like this community forum topic has some great wording explaining how settings actually work and behave: https://community.ynput.io/t/copying-settings-between-bundles/1867

:::tip Settings management
For more info about setting management go to [Addon Settings](admin_server_settings_management.md#addon-settings)
:::

### Working with bundles
#### Create bundles

> You can create a bundle by either one of these ways: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create a bundle in multiple ways: 
```

- `+ Add Bundle`
- Right-Click any bundle and Select `Duplicate and Edit` shortcut `Shift+D`
- Select any bundle and click `Duplicate and Edit` button on the upper right.

#### Configure bundles

Bundles are configured on creation where you specify
- Bundle name
- Launcher version
- Dev bundle toggle
- Addon versions

After Creation these are locked and you can then only change

> - Dependency Packages.

Reviewer: You can also still specify for which variant this bundle is active, like production, dev, etc.

Author: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/298/commits/462ad1a26e53efe037e6190da047f8232f77256e

- Change version of some server addons (that don't affect the pipeline). e.g. Jira Addon.

:::note
Dev bundle supports more configurations: 
- Assigned dev
- Addon versions
- Addon client code directory. This special one allows developers to test the client code directory without uploading the addon. 

>   However, they'll still need to upload the addons to update the settings on the server. 

Reviewer: If we have it - this is a perfect place to just link to developer mode documentation?

:::

### Working with Addons
#### Install Addons

- `Addon Market`
- `Upload Addons`

:::tip

> When updating pipeline release, new addons will be installed.

Reviewer: Similar to what the pop-up mention states it may be worth it to describe here that the addons are added to a new inactive bundle for you to test. It doesn't update your live running bundles or productions.

> This will not affect your existing setup, a new bundle will be created for testing first.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bb5e6ec7-2068-4ce1-a7c1-83fc2e99e7e7)

:::

#### Uninstall Addons
- `Uninstall Versions` button.

:::caution

> WIth local server deployment, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With local server deployment, 
```

You can add or remove addons by extracting and deleting files from your addons directory on your ayon-docker server.

> :::

Reviewer: I'm worried this may have unforeseen consequences and isn't something we should recommend in any way. 
This should really be a last resort.

@martastain thoughts?

If we want to keep this I'd rephrase it:

> Technically it is possible to add or remove addons to the server by extracting to or deleting files from your addons directory on the `ayon-docker` server directly. However, we recommend using the AYON frontend or API to manage the addons to ensure the correct behavior. Managing the files on the server directly should be a last resort.

:::info

> Developers can upload/remove addons via ayon python api.

Reviewer: This would be best with an example, or a link to documentation that shows that particular part of that API.

description: Bundles & Addons Documentation.
toc_max_heading_level: 5
---

## Bundles vs Addon
A bundle is a set of addons.
An addon is a set of code and settings used to extend AYON server and pipeline.

Bundles can be marked as `production`, `staging`, `<dev-bundle-name>` variant.

:::note Launch with different variants
You can use different variants with the launcher.
You can specify which variant to use by using the following flags with AYON launcher:
- `--use-staging`
- `--use-dev`

You can override the default behavior and explicitly specify a bundle on launch, see:
[How to use different bundles with different projects?](https://community.ynput.io/t/how-to-use-different-bundles-with-different-projects/1096)
:::
        
:::note Dev variants

> For a dev bundle the its dev variant has the sae name `<dev-bundle-name>`.

Reviewer 6: Two small typos :)

```suggestion
For a dev bundle its dev variant has the same name `<dev-bundle-name>`.
```
